# The HPE Cray Programming Environment

*[[back: The Lmod module system]](1_02_Lmod.md)*

---

On LUMI, the main programming environment is the HPE Cray Programming Environment (further abbreviated
as Cray PE). The environment provides several tools, including compilers, communication libraries, 
optmized math libraries and various other libraries, analyzers and debuggers.

The Cray PE is made available through *environment modules* tha allow to select particular versions of 
tools and to configure the environment in a flexible way.

---

## Cray PE components

-   **Cray Compiling Environment (CCE)**:

    CCE consists of Cray compilers performing code analysis during compilation to generate highly optimized code. 
    Supported languages include Fortran, C and C++, and UPC (Unified Parallel C).
    The Cray C/C++ compiler is basically the Clang/LLVM compiler with a back-end configured by HPE Cray that also
    adds some Cray-specific options while the Cray Fortran compiler uses an HPE-Cray specific front-end
    with a back-end based on LLVM. The Fortran compiler supports most of Fortran 2018 and tends to be 
    considerably stricter than the GNU or Intel Fortran compilers.

    The CCE compilers will also support OpenMP offload to NVIDIA and AMD GPUs but that is still work in progress
    at the time of the development of this tutorial. The Fortran compiler (but not the C/C++ compiler) also supports
    OpenACC for offloading to GPU.

    The classic pre-LLVM Cray C/C++ compiler is not available on Cray EX systems.

-   **Cray Scientific and Mathematical Libraries (CSML)**: 

    A set of high performance libraries providing portability for scientific applications, sparse and dense linear
    algebra (BLAS, LAPACK, ScaLAPACK) and fast Fourier transforms (FFTW).

    There is a special (more limited) version of the library with GPU-optimized routines.

    CSML also includes the HDF5 and netCDF libraries, in versions with and without MPI.

-   **Cray Message Passing Toolkit**:

    A collection of software libraries used to perform data transfers between nodes running in parallel applications. 
    It includes the Message Passing Interface (MPI) and OpenSHMEM parallel programming models. 

    The HPE Cray MPI implementation is based on the MPICH3 sources from ANL. However, some algorithms are tweaked
    specifically for HPE Cray hardware and the Cray interconnects. 

-   **Cray Environment Setup and Compiling Support**:
  
    Libraries supporting code compilation and setting up the development environment, including compiler drivers.

-   **Cray Performance and Analysis Tools**:

    Tools to analyze the performance and behavior of programs that are run on Cray systems, and a Performance API (PAPI).

-   **Cray Debugging Support Tools**:

    Debugging tools, including `gdb4hpc` and `Valgrind4hpc`.

-   **Third-party compilers**:

    The Cray PE also supports several third-party compilers. Not all compilers are supported on all systems:

    -   The GNU C/C++ and Fortran compilers will be present on most systems with the Cray PE.

    -   The AMD AOCC C/C++ and Fortran compilers are supported on systems with AMD CPUs.

    -   The AMD ROCm compilers (sometimes known as AOMP) are supported on systems with AMD GPU technology.

    -   The Intel C/C++ and Fortran compilers (also the oneAPI versions) are supported on systems with Intel
        processors. HPE Cray does not include them in licenses for AMD CPUs.

    -   The NVIDIA HPC Toolkit compilers are supported on systems with NVIDIA GPUs.


---

## Configuring the Cray PE through modules

Compilers in the Cray Programming Environment are almost always used through the Cray compiler wrappers. In fact,
until recently, some compilers could not be used without the wrappers as they failed to even detect their own
include files and some components. The behaviour of the wrapper will depend on the other modules that are 
loaded in the environment. E.g., there is no separate wrapper for MPI as the MPI header files and libraries are
automatically activated through the regular wrappers as soon as a Cray MPI module is loaded.

Multiple releases of the HPE Cray PE can be installed simultaneously on the system and users can mix-and-match
components. However, it is also possible to load only components for a specific release of the PE.
Cray PE versions have version numbers of the form ``yy.mm``, e.g., ``22.02`` for the version released in
February of 2022. However, each of the components have their own version number and it is not easy to see
which version of a component came with which version(s) of the Cray PE.

Below we only discuss those modules that are important when building software with EasyBuild. Debuggers,
profilers, etc., are not included in the list.


### The PrgEnv-* modules

The usual way to initialise the Cray PE is by loading one of the ``PrgEnv-*`` modules. This module will then
load the appropriate compiler, compiler wrappers and other libraries. Some of the components that will be
loaded are configured through the ``/etc/cray-pe.d/cray-pe-configuration.sh`` file, so the list of modules
may depend on the actual system that you are using.

The Cray PE supports the following ``PrgEnv-*`` modules. On LUMI, only the first three are currently available:

| Module         | Compiler module | What?                                       |
|:---------------|-----------------|:--------------------------------------------|
| PrgEnv-cray    | cce             | The Cray Compiling Environment compilers    |
| PrgEnv-gnu     | gcc             | The GNU compilers                           |
| PrgEnv-aocc    | aocc            | AMD compilers for CPU-only systems          |
| PrgEnv-amd     | rocm            | AMD ROCm compilers for GPU systems          |
| PrgEnv-intel   | intel           | The Intel compilers                         |
| PrgEnv-nvidia  | nvidia          | NVIDIA HPC toolkit compilers (formerly PGI) | 

All ``PrgEnv-*`` modules belong to the same module family. Hence Lmod will automatically unload any
already loaded ``PrgEnv-*`` module when you load a different one.


### Selecting the version through the cpe module

Loading one of the ``cpe/yy.mm`` modules (e.g., ``cpe/22.02``) has the following effects:

-   It sets the default versions of each of the Cray PE modules to the version that comes with that
    particular release of the Cray PE. E.g.,

    ``` bash
    module load cpe/22.02
    module load cce
    ```

    would load that version of the ``cce`` compiler that comes with the 22.02 release of the Cray PE.

-   It will reload all already loaded Cray PE modules and switch them over to the version corresponding
    to that particular release of the Cray PE.

???+ Bug "Limitations and bugs"
    Due to the way Lmod works and implementation bugs in the ``cpe`` modules, loading the ``cpe`` module
    does not always have the desired effect.

    -   The Cray PE sets the default version of each module by adding a file to the list of files in the
        ``LMOD_MODULERCFILE`` environment variable. This is because Lmod does not re-evaluate the visibility
        of modules and the internal list of default version immediately when the value of ``LMOD_MODULERCFILE``
        is changed but only the next time the ``module`` command is executed. Hence
        ``` bash
        module load cpe/22.02 ; module load cce
        ```
        and
        ```
        module load cpe/22.02 cce
        ```
        do not have the same effect. In the first version, the version of ``cce`` loaded is the version that
        corresponds to the 22.02 release of the Cray PE. In the second case however the default version of the
        ``cce`` module is determined by whatever list of default modules was used when calling the ``module``
        command so may or may not be the one of the 22.02 release.

    -   Loading the ``cpe`` module after loading the other Cray PE modules also does not always have the 
        desired effect in many versions of the Cray PE. This is because of a bug in the ``cpe `` module that
        reloads the modules in the wrong order which may trigger the reload of a module with whatever version
        was the default when the ``module`` command was called rather than the version the the ``cpe`` module
        intends to (re-)load.


### The compiler wrapper module craype

The ``craype`` module loads the compiler wrappers. There is only one set of compiler wrappers for all compilers.
Which compiler will be called, which libraries will be included, but also processor and GPU target options will
be used, is all determined by other modules. Hence it is in principle possible to use a single Makefile for
a project and still reconfigure the build by loading certain modules.


### Target modules

The targets for CPU and GPU optimization, the network library for MPI bt also some other compiler options, 
can be set through target modules:

-   ``craype-x86-*`` (and similar options can be expected on ARM-based systems) set the target for CPU
    optimisations. For LUMI, the ``crape-x86-rome``, ``craype-x86-milan`` and ``craype-x86-trento`` modules
    are relevant.

    This can also be used to cross-compile to a different target architecture unless the compiler target
    gets overwritten by a compiler flag added to the command line through the Makefile or other means,
    something that unfortunately happens more and more often in faulty software installation procedures.

-    ``creype-accel-*`` sets the target for OpenMP offload (and likely other technologies in the future). E.g.,
     loading ``craype-accel-amd-gfx90a`` tells the compilers to target AMD MI200 family GPUs, while loading
     ``craype-accel-host`` tells the compiler to use the CPU instead (according to the documentation, the latter
     is for ``PrgEnv-cray`` only).

-   ``craype-network-*`` selects the communication library to be used by Cray MPICH. On Slingshot 11 EX systems, 
    only ``craype-network-ofi`` is supported, but Slingshot 10 EX systems also offer support for UCX through the
    ``craype-network-ucx`` module.

-   The ``craype-hugepages*`` modules enable Cray Huge Pages support. To fully enable this support they have to
    be used at link-time and at run-time. At link time, support is compiled into the binary wile at run-time they
    are used to set the actual size of the huge pages. 

    The ``craype-hugepages*`` modules are not supported by all compilers. E.g., the AOCC compiler does not support
    huge pages at the moment, and loading the module at link time will cause an error message from the linker.


### The compiler modules

The compiler modules have already been discussed with the ``PrgEnv-*`` modules above. The different regular 
compiler modules also all belong to the same family so no two different compilers can be loaded simultaneously
and Lmod will automatically unload the other compiler when a new one is loaded.


### The MPI modules

To load the Cray MPI libraries, both one of the ``craype-network-*`` modules and a compiler module has to be
loaded as the MPI libraries are both network- and compiler specific.

For some unknown reason, the MPI module for the libfabric (``craype-network-ofi``) transport is called ``cray-mpich``
while the library for the UCX transport (``craype-network-ucx``) is called ``craype-network-ucx``. As a result,
the MPI module fails to reload automatically when switching between both transports, but it does reload automatically
when switching compilers.

Loading an MPI module will also automatically configure the regular compiler wrappers to compile with support for
that MPI module. However, the libfabric and UCX versions of the MPI library have compatible interfaces, so it is
always possible to swap between those versions at runtime.


### The Cray Scientific libraries

The Cray Scientific Libraries are loaded through the ``cray-libsci`` module (or ``cray-libsci_acc`` for the GPU 
versions). Loading this module makes the BLAS, LAPACK, and ScaLAPACK libraries available, and also the Cray IRT 
(Iterative Refinement Toolkit), a Cray-specific library. It will also configure the compiler wrappers to link
with these libraries, so no additional include or link options are needed.


### The ``fftw`` module

As FFTW is a third party library, it gets its own module (``cray-fftw``) and is not included in the ``cray-libsci`` module.

The ``cray-fftw`` module can only be loaded if one of the processor target modules (the ``craype-x86-*`` modules) 
is loaded first.


---

## Some unexpected behaviour of the Cray PE

On Cray EX systems, dynamic linking is the preferred way of linking applications. Whith that comes some
unexpected behaviour of the Cray modules. EasyBuild users expect that at run time the versions of the 
libraries that are used, are the ones from the modules that are loaded. This is not always the case
for the runtime libraries of the Cray PE. By default the Cray PE will use a default set of libraries
that is determined by the system default version of the Cray PE (which is set by the sysadmins, not 
determined by the ``cpe`` module). This can only be avoided by either using\
rpath-linking (which is also special in the Cray PE as the wrappers activate rpath linking if the
environment variable ``CRAY_ADD_RPATH`` is defined and set to ``yes``) or by manually adjusting 
the library path after loading the modules:
``` bash
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${CRAY_LD_LIBRARY_PATH}:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```
The latter cannot be easily automated in modulefiles. Any technique that can be used (without actually
reworking the Cray PE modules) has nasty side effects in some scenarios.

The net result of this feature is that some reproducibility of the results is lost. Programs will
react differently if the system default version of the Cray PE is changed as that will change the
set of default libraries that will be used at runtime unless rpath-linking is used or users
redfine ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``. 


---

## Further reading

-   [LUMI documentation: "Developing" section](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/development/)
-   The Cray PE is mostly documented through man pages. There used to be some documentation on the
    Cray web site also but the documentation system got reworked after the merger with HPE.
    The documentation is now in the [HPE Support Centre](https://support.hpe.com/) where it
    is very difficult to find the right version of the documents.
-   The [PE-Cray](https://github.com/PE-Cray) GitHub project also provides some additional 
    documentation, including
    -   [some whitepapers](https://github.com/PE-Cray/whitepapers),
    -   [documentation for Cray OpenSMHEMX](https://github.com/PE-Cray/cray-openshmemx) and
    -   [information about Cray DSMML](https://github.com/PE-Cray/cray-dsmml)
    though much of that information ia also not updated regularly anymore.

    
---

*[[next: LUMI software stacks]](1_04_LUMI_software_stack.md)*
